[THEME MUSIC]
>>FRANK DE LUCA:
I try to present
the Enneagram more as a
lens, kind of a narrow lens.
But what happens is
you see a broad view.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: You're
still OK if you know yourself.
But if you don't?
>>FRANK: If you don't,
you're in trouble I think.
Underneath each type is one
version of I'm not lovable.
I'm not worthy.
It's a way to try
to fill up that gap.
There's some knowledge and
a lot of mystery around it.
You could say that we
are each a piece of work.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>FRANK: You could also say
we are each a work of art.
And both are true.
What you add to that exclamation
point is a question mark
and say, I have to
do this this way.
Well, don't I?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>REGINA: In my previous
conversation with Frank De
Luca, we gave an
overview of the Enneagram
and touched on some
of the personality
types and their dynamics.
Today, Frank is back
with us, and we're
going to take a deeper dive into
the potential of the Enneagram
in all of our relationships.
His new book is titled
"A Field Guide to Humans:
Enriching Relationships
Through the Enneagram."
Welcome back, Frank.
It's so good to see you again.
>>FRANK: Thank you.
Thank you for having me back.
I loved the conversation
I had last time with you.
>>REGINA: I love it.
And you got a good
response to it.
People want to
know more about it.
And I know that because
you're back already.
That means you were
really popular.
[LAUGHTER]
>>FRANK: I'm glad to hear that.
It's this material that is
so captivating for people.
And once you touch it, you think
that there's something here,
and I want to follow what it is.
So I'm happy to talk about it.
>>REGINA: And you did--
I said this last time,
and I will say it again
because your book is out.
I saw an early version before
it went through the editing
process and everything.
And I was so blown away by
the essential nature of it.
And I mean, you took so
much and boiled it down
in a beautiful, beautifully
illustrated small book
to the essence of
each of these types.
And that took, well, a lifetime
of doing the Enneagram.
>>FRANK: It took a bit of work.
[LAUGHS]
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
I really respect what you
did because it's useful.
Anyone can sit down and use it.
>>FRANK: That was my idea, this
should be accessible to people
without having to be taken
away by too much information
or theory that you're
really not ready for.
There's so many layers
to the Enneagram.
And I tried to present
just a layer that
will be helpful immediately
in your relationship.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So kudos to you.
So first thing I
want to find out
is sometimes when people
use the Enneagram,
you use it to put others
more than yourself in a box.
And you said that's not how the
Enneagram is meant to be used.
It's a lens.
So if you would please go ahead
and explain the difference
between those so we don't get in
some bad habits using Enneagram
right off the bat.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
Try to correct that
from the start.
Well, it's easy because
we could think--
well, we read a
little description,
and we decide, oh, I know.
You must be a five.
And then it's kind of like
the conversation is done.
I have it down.
I read something about fives,
and you definitely are a five.
And if I'm on the
receiving end of that,
especially if I don't know
anything about the Enneagram,
it's like, what did
you just do to me?
It's like-- I say--
I think it's a conviction.
It's like, oh, I've got it.
The other way-- and
it's also a box.
And some people object to the
Enneagram or any typing system
to say I'm all of these.
Or don't put me here.
I'm more than this.
You are.
But if you take
the time to notice,
we tend to be patterned people.
We tend to-- and people who
know us see our patterns more
than we do.
How often in a
relationship to someone
say "you always," "you never."
That means they're
seeing a pattern.
And you might say,
oh, I never do that.
Well, every day you do that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And that's-- and we are blind
to our own habitual nature.
>>FRANK: It's exactly right.
So I try to present the
Enneagram more as a lens,
meaning look through this.
It's kind of a narrow lens.
But what happens is
you see a broad view.
You begin to see someone
in their complexity.
You begin to see where
they-- what might
be going on inside of them.
Because the Enneagram,
in boxing people in,
their behavior is fixed.
And the Enneagram
says it really isn't
so much about your
behavior what your type is,
but what's motivating you?
Why do you act that way?
That's why people have a
hard time typing themselves
or others because we all act
like these different types
at different times.
But it takes a while
to see what I'm
calling the hidden personality.
And the Enneagram is
really talking about what
we don't see about ourselves.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, that seems
very apparent.
You and I were talking when you
were getting your hair coiffed,
you know, about--
I said, well, I think
I'm this, this, and this.
And you're like, hmm,
but are you really?
It's like we see
ourselves as one way.
And because this is almost
kind of a self-diagnosis--
you can do it
through software too,
and it'll kind of
give you types--
we're only going through
our lens of perception
about ourselves.
>>FRANK: Right.
Right.
That's a really good point.
And there are typing tests,
and you can do things,
and it can be helpful.
As you know, the trouble
with that is we're
going to see ourselves
a certain way.
And sometimes we choose the
type that we would like to be.
And also I've seen, for
example, recently more
men like to type themselves
as eights because they
think it's a more masculine--
>>REGINA: Power.
>>FRANK: --type.
The power, right.
It takes a while to
really discover your type.
I never push it.
I never-- I try not to
type people because it's
a discovery process.
And that's what I
mean about the lens.
You can take this and
put it on yourself.
But I don't think people
should ever believe,
even if someone else types
them, or three tests say this,
you have to verify it yourself.
You have to start to ask
the questions really?
Is that true about me?
And it starts a process
of self-discovery.
And so one layer-- outer
layer-- of the Enneagram
is these personalities.
But you go a step further
and say, is this true for me?
And as I think I said
before, the Enneagram
is not particularly
kind to our egos.
It's not here to
make us feel better.
>>REGINA: That is true.
And in the book even--
lovely, but it'll show the
elevated and detrimental aspect
of each of these aspects.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
And if we're able to
handle that truth,
it's a very liberating system.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Because everybody has the
elevated and detrimental
in them.
We're all struggling to learn
in some area of our life.
>>FRANK: Exactly.
>>REGINA: So not to be afraid
of that and say, oh, no,
I have to be perfect,
and get back--
because I interrupted
you on that, too--
going back to the
eight, and men trying
tending to overidentify with
the powerful and the eight.
What about-- I'm
wondering generationally
what that might look like?
Because I'm wondering
about the younger
millennials and zoomers.
Because oftentimes, the girls
are kind of outpacing them
in some basic levels now.
>>FRANK: That's a good question.
I hadn't really
thought about that.
I think that some--
well, there's personality
types, and then there's
the archetype of each one.
And certain times in
cultures, for example,
men might have been expected
to be more in the eight role.
But it doesn't mean they
were necessarily eights.
And I think what you're
alluding to with the younger
generation is it isn't quite
as fixed in gender roles
definitely, or in having
to be a certain way.
And so I think that--
I haven't-- some people
do try to look at trends.
Are there more of these types
at certain types of generations?
No one really has much
evidence about that.
>>REGINA: Like my
dad's generation
compared to a zoomer.
It's like, holy cow.
But then, of course,
if I can just say this,
there is reincarnation
in my book-- in my mind,
there is reincarnation.
And my dad's generation
and his dads are back.
I mean, they are zoomers
and millennials now.
And they bring those
imprints through, too.
I mean, these things take a
long time to cycle through--
>>FRANK: Lives.
Lifetimes, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yes, lifetimes.
And they can bring
back propensities
like putting a little--
carrying an attaché case and
wearing a buttoned-up shirt
to eighth grade.
It's like, grandpa's back.
[LAUGHTER]
>>FRANK: Right.
So we don't know if it's
really a personality
and cultural overlay.
Same with the Enneagram.
Sometimes people
can't see themselves
because maybe they work
in a company that's
very three-oriented.
They have to take on
three characteristics,
but they're not really a three.
But they don't know
that because they
become that for so many
years in order to get along
or to survive.
And sometimes that's
where stress is.
If someone is in
an environment that
expects them to behave in
a certain way that's not
their native land,
you might say,
you're always having to
push against your more
natural tendencies.
>>REGINA: And you've seen
this a lot because you're also
a counselor.
Your background is
in psychology, right?
>>FRANK: Mm-hmm.
>>REGINA: And so you've
dealt with a lot of people,
both on an interpersonal
level, marriage and family.
But also, just what
you're talking about,
is how you have to
present yourself
in your professional world.
I'm not asking for
percentages, but is it common
that someone is actually
presenting who they really
truly are when they show up in
their power world around them?
Are we often having
to wear masks?
>>FRANK: Oh, there's
a lot of that.
And it's just-- that's
just how life is.
I mean, you just deal with it.
This is where
self-awareness really helps.
Because I think that most
stress that people experience is
they just don't know
themselves well enough.
If you know yourself
well enough,
and you're in an
environment that's
demanding you behave
in certain ways,
you can kind of figure
out a way through that.
>>REGINA: You can fake it.
>>FRANK: You can kind
of fake it if you want.
And you know who you really are.
>>REGINA: You're still
OK if you know yourself,
but if you don't?
>>FRANK: If you don't,
you're in trouble, I think.
Because then you don't
know who the real self is
and how you might normally be.
And so you're going to be
pushing against your tendency.
And I find the
Enneagram-- once you
begin to kind of see
your basic nature,
you can align yourself more
with that in the positive way,
hopefully.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
>>FRANK: And we all
keep saying, we all
can take on behaviors of
any of the nine types.
There are certain times--
when I was doing a book,
and working with an editor, and
thinking about presentation,
and thinking about
now getting that
into the marketplace, that's
a very three function.
I want this to look good.
I want it to be successful.
I want to bring people around
me who can make this successful.
I want to be known for this.
That's not my native
land, actually.
>>REGINA: What are--
tell me your number.
>>FRANK: I'm a type one.
My focus is I want
to get it done right.
This has to be exactly
perfect from the get-go.
>>REGINA: Oh, my gosh.
And then you have to
engage with an editor.
[LAUGHTER]
>>FRANK: Who was a one, I think.
>>REGINA: Oh, no.
>>FRANK: We're not sure.
But editing is a good example.
Editing is a one function.
You have to be exacting.
You have to try to
get the words right.
You want to present correctly.
But it doesn't mean
the editor was a one,
but she was functioning
in that role.
And so for me, as a
one, it can be real hell
because I'm already worried
about getting it right.
And have someone
else who's getting--
make sure my words are right.
We went back and
forth quite a bit.
I went through some stress.
>>REGINA: Oh, that's
an exhausting process
under the best of circumstances.
>>FRANK: And I had to kind
of borrow on the three,
I'll have to admit.
It said, this is good enough.
I mean, I had Enneagram teachers
verify this is good enough.
But my job was to
say, but I want this
to go out in the world more.
And threes are
really good at that.
They understand presentation.
They understand knowing
what people want
and how to present that.
And so as a one, at
root, it can feel like,
but it's got to have integrity.
Well, I'm in integrity.
But there were certain
things in the book where
I had to say, this
is good enough,
and it's time to keep it moving.
And a three has a very
forward-moving energy.
We have a goal.
We're going to get there.
So I had to borrow on
the three quite a bit.
>>REGINA: I'm glad you
talked about the one
because a little
later on in our talk,
we're going to get to
some type combinations.
And the only one that
wasn't included was the one.
So now we just found-- tell us
a little bit more about the one
again, about yourself, besides
the need to have things right,
that sense of
integrity, perfection.
>>FRANK: It's an innate drive.
If you go down a few layers in
the Enneagram and motivation,
and even kind of
existential motivation
or spiritual motivation--
because the Enneagram
is based in spirituality.
And so for a one, what
feels like what is missing
is that somehow I
haven't gotten there.
I'm not quite good enough.
I want to avoid being bad,
making mistakes, certainly
failing, doing things wrong,
being noticed and being
corrected on something.
>>REGINA: Being humiliated.
>>FRANK: Being humiliated.
And so it's a sense of,
I've got to be really good
and get things right,
or I'm not lovable.
So underneath each type is one
version of, I'm not lovable.
I'm not worthy.
And you could say that
our personalities are
a reaction to that, or it's a
way to try to fill up that gap.
>>REGINA: Which is at the
basis of all humanity,
a lack of self-esteem.
>>FRANK: Lack of self-esteem.
And the Enneagram even
goes deeper and says,
we've lost our connection
to our divine self.
>>REGINA: Yes, which is why we
have the self-esteem issues.
>>FRANK: Right.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Well, let me ask you a
question now because you just
brought it up, and we didn't
talk about it last time.
And you said because this is
a spiritual type of endeavor,
the Enneagram.
What is it actually based on?
I don't think I asked you
that in our first interview.
>>FRANK: I talked a
little bit about it,
but there's some knowledge and
a lot of mystery around it.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
Where did it come from?
>>FRANK: Well, the symbol
itself, from what we know--
it's more speculation.
Some people try
to research this,
but it could have been from
Pythagoras and going back
to the Greeks, as far
as sacred geometry.
Others say it kind of
similar to the tree of life,
and we have this projection
of these nine elements here.
And it certainly-- it comes
from mystical traditions, not
the exoteric religions.
But--
>>REGINA: Such as?
>>FRANK: Well, in
Islam, in Christianity,
in Christian mysticism,
in Buddhism and Eastern
philosophy as well,
there's a sense--
there's a psychology
in there about what
is the nature of the universe.
It didn't start
with personalities.
The Enneagram, as the
symbol, started with kind
of a map of the universe.
>>REGINA: That's what I
was just going to ask.
It sounds like nine
energies causing--
>>FRANK: It's actually
three energies.
If you see, in the
middle of the triangle--
at the middle of the
circle, there's a triangle.
And there's where the nine,
the three, and the six are.
And so this is the law of three.
>>REGINA: Right.
Where we could look
at-- you can go back
to the Egyptian parlance.
You could say Isis, Osiris,
Horus-- the masculine,
feminine and--
>>FRANK: Just repeats.
>>REGINA: Yes.
It repeats everywhere.
>>FRANK: So you can see
this repeating pattern
in many traditions.
And the Enneagram is
built on that triad.
So there's the three energies.
In one way we say--
in the Enneagram--
it's like one is moving forward.
One is whoa.
Let's wait a minute-- slow down.
And the top one is saying,
let's mediate between these two
forces.
So it's really the experience
of the forces of the universe.
And what we know is then that
in the early 20th century,
the first time a symbol kind
of appeared again, we will say.
Although, we don't
have documentation.
>>REGINA: Right It was brought
through from somewhere,
sometime.
>>FRANK: It was brought through.
And Gurdjieff, who was
a mystic philosopher,
was the one who put
this into his teachings.
He didn't talk so much
about personalities
but about the
energies of each one.
And he had a sense of how to
work with students to wake them
up by using the Enneagram.
So there is where it
kind of came through.
We don't know quite how
it came through him.
But I think I mentioned Oscar
Ichazo, another kind of mystic,
philosopher, teacher
who just died--
I don't know-- maybe five years
ago, who began to use this
and talked about ego fixations
and several Enneagons,
he called it.
And here's where we get the
Enneagram of personality,
the Enneagram of the virtues,
the Enneagram or the Holy ideas
and so forth.
They came into more popular
personality beginning
in the '70s through
Claudio Naranjo,
who was a psychiatrist trained
in personality systems--
also a mystic.
I heard an interview
with him that was taped.
And he said basically it was
kind of like automatic writing,
how he really got
to this material.
So he used his Western mind
and his more mystical mind.
And that was when the Enneagram
came-- in about the '70s--
came into.
He taught it to a few people.
And from that group,
it began to spread.
>>REGINA: It really
came into the West.
Because I first remember
hearing about it in the '80s.
And people were using it
a lot in the workplace
in corporate world--
>>FRANK: Already, then?
OK, yeah.
>>REGINA: --relationships
in general.
But I remember--
maybe I was just
tapped into people who were
using it for the workplace.
But it was to see the functional
compatibilities of people.
Let's talk about
that for a moment
because it's all relationships.
Do you do some of that between
members of the same group
or corporation?
>>FRANK: Yes.
I have used it.
I've done consulting, leadership
training, and team building,
and I use it with discretion.
The Enneagram, to
really learn it,
takes a bit of vulnerability.
You have to be willing to open
and to disclose and to have
someone--
it's like an X-ray machine.
And so you're in a group
of people you work with,
and the light is
shining there on you.
And it's like that.
So I only used it--
what I preferred to do,
and I did more of this,
was to work with leaders.
Because, for example, some
years ago I was in a period
where I did a lot of
consulting with people
who were in creative fields--
interior design.
Then I got referred to
the landscape architect
company, decorative
painting company--
all these people who
were in creative fields.
And I found that if I
worked with the leader,
that would help.
But I did work with
someone who heard about me,
and he hired me with
his small company.
And he was frustrated all
the time with his employees.
And I kind of got
a sense this man
was a four, which some
deeply creative people are--
pretty dramatic, moody--
>>REGINA: Little
judgmental, maybe?
>>FRANK: A little judgmental.
Brilliant in many ways,
but he had no idea
how to relate to his staff
or take care of his staff.
He was just over his
head all the time.
And so he wanted me to go
and work with his staff
so that they wouldn't
complain to him.
Not a great arrangement
for a consultant.
>>REGINA: No, that's not--
That's a big setup.
>>FRANK: It didn't
last too long.
Because it was like, please,
I can't-- and as a four,
what he would do is he
would pay them more.
He would do-- he would try to--
>>REGINA: Just do it.
Here's money.
Do it.
>>FRANK: Just please
leave me alone.
What do you need from me--
kind of a two side of things.
How can I help you out?
That didn't go so well.
So I learned through time
not to take on that dynamic.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let me ask you.
In a situation where
you have a four who's
trying to be the
boss but doesn't
know how to relate
to people as well,
wouldn't it be best if
they had a built-in mediary
between others?
>>FRANK: Well, that's--
>>REGINA: I mean,
wouldn't they hire
someone that would be--
what type could balance them
out and relate well
to the employees?
>>FRANK: Well, I think he had
his top person there was a one,
and we can get things organized.
But that's true.
You can either substitute and
get someone who can do the job.
Or if someone's
willing, they can
learn how to be a leader
from a four perspective.
>>REGINA: But if they can't,
they'd be a wise person--
>>FRANK: If they can't,
then they have to-- they're
going to be paying the price.
>>REGINA: --to
bring someone else.
Well, to bring someone else in.
>>FRANK: But if they're
aware enough, yes,
they can bring in,
let's say, a three.
They can bring in someone else.
>>REGINA: That's not a failure.
>>FRANK: No.
But, again, a little
bit of awareness.
He wasn't aware that he was
driving his employees crazy.
So there's where the
self-awareness comes in.
>>REGINA: So let's
go back to what you
talked about a little bit ago.
So this guy has that-- his
hidden dynamics going on.
They're hidden
mostly from himself.
And we all have hidden
dynamics going on.
What does it require besides
vulnerability and humility
to really start excavating
and allow ourselves to have
revealed what's underneath--
good and bad?
A lot of people can't
see their good stuff.
>>FRANK: This is true.
You know, I think--
this is-- it's a great question.
Because I-- but even
before the Enneagram,
I've been doing personal
growth work and so forth.
And I can always see some
people seem to wake up and be
willing to look and others not.
I could never predict exactly
who that would happen to.
And in some ways,
it takes a wound,
some major hit, some failure.
>>REGINA: Big gash in the side.
>>FRANK: A big gash.
A hit the head--
side of the head.
And they go, oh.
That sometimes happens.
In a company, for example,
though, when you're the boss,
you're kind of protected
from rebellion.
I mean, you know, you're
in a power position.
So in other words, people
have to kind of work
around your ego and your--
I think-- I believe this
man knew he was a four.
But that was all he knew.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Just a number.
>>FRANK: It was just a number.
And he could see it
happening, but he
couldn't do anything about it.
So what someone
does with that is
there has to be some moment--
and I kind of put
that in the book--
that there's an aha moment.
And to me, it happens
through relationship.
I think it's really
through relationship
that can be the catalyst to--
>>REGINA: One kind or another.
>>FRANK: --to go deeper in
there and say, what is this?
Why am I left in
this same pattern
again of feeling
rejected, or that people
don't understand me, or they
won't do what I want them to.
Why is it I've gone
through several employees,
several relationships, several
friendships, and the same thing
occurs.
It's that moment
when someone can
say, what's the same in
all of these scenarios?
Oh, me.
Well, what about me?
>>REGINA: And what is
that function within us
that holds so tightly
to our stories of self,
that we feel that if we allow
that vulnerable truth to come
through, we're going to what?
Dissolve?
Not exist anymore?
What is it we're
so terrified of?
>>FRANK: I know.
There's where I kind of
go to that we're really
all pretty tender.
We're protective.
None of us want to
be wounded again.
And our personality,
in many ways,
is a protection
against that wounding.
So we identify with the
shield or the armor.
>>REGINA: The story.
>>FRANK: The story.
And the story is that
it's a spiritual answer.
It's a psychological answer.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's deep.
>>FRANK: It's many things.
>>REGINA: But most
people have it,
to one degree or another,
this self-protection.
>>FRANK: Well, I remember before
I got into this kind of work,
when I was--
even in my 20s, I remember
driving by Esalen, for example,
in California where people
are-- this is in the '60s, '70s.
People are doing all
these wild workshops
and exposing themselves
and so forth.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
A lot of nudity.
>>FRANK: And I thought, no way.
I got into the human potential
movement early on in my 20s,
where intensive workshops
of exploration and kind
of revealing things.
Then I began to see
the value of it.
But it usually took someone
either holding my hand
and saying, really,
this is not so bad.
And I think that most good
things come into our life
through good relationship--
someone we trust,
someone that helps us.
>>REGINA: Someone that
sees us for what we truly
are and accepts the parts
that aren't perfect.
>>FRANK: That's
a big part of it.
And this is where I
love the Enneagram
because it gives you that lens.
And I tried to put in the book--
I have that quote in the
opening to the chapter,
to the introduction,
that says, you
could say that we are
each a piece of work.
You could also say we
are each a work of art.
And both are true.
And to me, the Enneagram
gives you the lens
where you see the whole picture.
And once you see that
work of art in there,
you begin to relate
to someone there.
You kind of-- the
Enneagram, in a way,
gives you a chance to look
through the personality
to the soul and the
struggle of the soul
to just emerge
through that story.
But once we can start
to trust that piece,
we don't take our
personality as personally.
And the word I use for
it, and other people do,
we're not grasping as
hard under our story.
For a one, I say,
well, we have to do--
I have to do things right.
It's like my survival
depends upon this.
Otherwise, I don't know
what's going to happen.
So that's a
declarative statement.
I have to do this.
What you add to that exclamation
point is a question mark
and say, I have to
do this this way.
Well, don't I?
I never thought about that.
Well, don't I have to be totally
prepared for this interview
and make sure I answer
every question correctly?
Maybe I don't.
Maybe I could be present.
And in a way, our story keeps
us away from being present.
We don't trust the moment.
>>REGINA: That's interesting
because that's what I do.
I overprepare, and it's
my security blanket.
>>FRANK: It helps.
>>REGINA: But then when
I show up, I may not--
we may not use the
script at all, or we may.
But I tend to overprepare.
And I have people say all
the time, why do you do that?
>>FRANK: So you can be present.
>>REGINA: So I can be present.
Because then it's all done.
It's on paper.
If something falters, or
if someone blanks out,
I've got something to refer to.
But it--
>>FRANK: Yeah.
To me--
>>REGINA: --requires
a lot of work.
>>FRANK: We're all trying to
work towards being present.
And once you see
yourself through the lens
of the Enneagram, you recognize
that we would rather be right.
We would rather help someone.
We would rather be wounded.
We would rather be in power.
We grab on to that
aspect of personality
because we don't trust
that we have enough
in the present moment
that we will be cared for,
or we will just have something
that will flow through us.
And so we grab onto--
so it's the grasping
that distinguishes
our more expansive side.
I know you-- I think maybe--
>>REGINA: We're going to go into
the expansive and contraction
thing.
But you know what I want to do?
I want to get to those
type combinations
now so we can get an
idea of how they operate,
then get into the expansive
contraction thing.
Does that make sense?
>>FRANK: Go for it.
It's fine.
>>REGINA: Does that work?
OK.
So let's dive in now.
Because we've talked about the
one and what the one is about.
Now, we're going to
get into the others,
but in combination
with each other.
So we're going to take
a three with a six.
>>FRANK: Hmm.
That's a good one.
And I'll say why a
good one because if--
the Enneagram is a map.
And I talked about the
triangle, and there's lines
that connect different types.
And the three and
the six are connected
by a line, the horizontal line
at the bottom of the pyramid.
So I have found that
there's a lot to be learned
and sometimes a lot of
blood under the bridge
between these types.
Here's the essential
assumption of a three.
Life is about
getting things done.
Life is about finding
out what the world wants
and providing that to the world.
Life is about being
noticed for achievements.
Life is about I'm OK
being in the limelight.
I want to get things
done efficiently.
If it's done perfectly, it's
not that important to me.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
That would be some
trouble with a one.
>>FRANK: Well, a one--
that's a whole other one.
The six, it can be similar.
Because the six is looking out
for others in a certain way.
But like a one, there's a
certain ethical standard
that sixes have.
>>REGINA: So what
does a six embody?
>>FRANK: Six is--
I call them the guardians.
They tend to watch
out-- they don't quite
trust that appearances
are what they are.
So a six looking into three--
big-time skeptic.
They can see through
the three's facade.
Because threes are
OK with a facade.
>>REGINA: So are three's good
with expediency, for example?
And a six might say, that's not
really being covered properly?
>>FRANK: Exactly.
I think I gave an
example in the book.
The six is working for a three.
The six might see
all the things--
there could be ethical
problems coming around,
or problems we hadn't thought
about that could hit us.
It could wipe us out as
a company or something.
And the three is just
kind of, move it.
>>REGINA: Just get her done.
>>FRANK: Get it done.
And the six is
saying, wait a minute.
So a three can feel like the
six is dragging things down.
And the six will say,
but listen, really.
Because sixes sometimes
get overlooked
because it's like they kind
of have this antenna radar
to sense when things
could go wrong.
And they want to prevent
that from happening.
So actually, a wonderful ally--
you want to have a good
six on your team to say,
have you thought about this?
What about contingency planning?
What about this and this
and this could go wrong?
And the three is
like, eh, you know.
So there's a tension
between the two.
What happens, especially if
people get to know their types,
they're not in conflict anymore.
>>REGINA: Well, so in this
case, the six is the employee
of the three--
is under the three.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
Now, if it's the other
way, the six will--
well, sometimes sixes have a
difficult time in leadership
because it's hard for
them to trust themselves,
and they don't trust
other people as well.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Trust is a factor.
>>FRANK: Trust.
They don't know that
they know enough,
or they have self-doubt.
And so-- and they
can do it either
by kind of falling back
into doubt or the opposite.
It called counterphobic
six, where full speed ahead.
I don't care about
what's going to happen.
It's like being reckless.
Because both are focused on what
they think is most important.
If you look at the
nine types, they're
kind of all around the circle.
And they're all looking
at the same thing,
but from a different viewpoint.
We need the three.
We need the six.
And if the six can
understand that we--
if a six is not
friendly with a three,
they kind of get stuck
in paralysis of wanting
to overanalyze something.
We haven't thought
enough through this.
So threes get
frustrated with sixes
if a six is in leadership
because they feel like they're
not moving fast enough.
We can't consider
all these things.
We really have to move ahead.
And so a six could feel more
anxious because of that,
more stressed.
So the six really has to get
to know his or her self pretty
well and know when they're
overdoing their skepticism
and their doubt.
And that's probably a
key thing for every type.
The thing that is our
strength when overdone
becomes our weakness
or our vulnerability.
>>REGINA: Key thing to know.
>>FRANK: A six's sense
of skepticism, concern--
>>REGINA: Paralyzing.
>>FRANK: --wary,
overdone-- it's a mess.
If they can learn to
say, well, let me--
sixes, you have to do
your reality check.
Is that really going to happen?
What are the probabilities?
Let's look at this more openly.
Because each person--
each type gets fixated
in the emotion behind it.
So a six says, if I don't
pay attention to this,
I'm sure something bad
is going to happen.
But if I do a little bit of
reality checking and someone
helps them do that,
they go, well, OK.
Maybe not.
Let's move ahead.
But it takes a lot
to unhinge them,
you might say,
from that concern.
>>REGINA: And from the number
three's point of view then?
How do they resolve-- the
three and the six resolve?
>>FRANK: They have to
appreciate one another.
And I think that
basically, you--
>>REGINA: That requires
maturity, and also
some contemplative
experience with that person.
>>FRANK: Good leadership always
require some self-awareness.
And then also
begin to appreciate
there's more than one
way to see something,
and there's where the
Enneagram is brilliant.
It's not a right or wrong.
And then we learn, how do I get
the best out of this person?
And that becomes really
where the Enneagram
is extremely useful as well.
How do I see their high
qualities there and use those?
>>REGINA: And I would
think the compassion.
Because you might see a
type in operation thinking,
I don't relate at all.
Well, they're just trying
to hog the limelight,
or whatever it is that
you're seeing that you
don't like in your judging.
But also understand
that's your wound
speaking to perhaps their wound.
>>FRANK: Yes.
Yes.
That's exactly right.
It does come down to compassion.
And I don't think we
can really get there
unless we have gone into the
wounding of our own type,
and we feel how
difficult the struggle
is to not always go that way.
Because these are
tied-in, deep places
of these kind of mental,
emotional patterns that got
set a long time--
they're in our bodies.
>>REGINA: Oh, gosh.
They're our bodies.
They're in our DNA.
They're ancestral.
Yes.
OK.
So ready to go to the next one?
>>FRANK: Sure.
>>REGINA: Put a
five with a seven.
>>FRANK: Again,
the lines connect
between the five and the seven.
So fives tend to kind of
hold their energy in--
the sin it's called,
the passion is avarice,
meaning not that
they're cheap, but they
feel there's not enough
energy to go around,
so I have to kind of contain.
I want to use that to go
deeper into something.
It's a mental type.
They love to research.
>>REGINA: So they might
feel more closed off
or isolated or introverted?
>>FRANK: They choose that.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
And so we're perceiving it,
but they're choosing that.
>>FRANK: Well, that's their--
that is their strategy.
Because what their fear
is I will be overwhelmed
by people's emotional needs.
I don't have time for this.
I'm doing something important,
and I'm doing something deep.
I want to put all of
my intention in that.
Please don't distract me.
And so they can be extroverted
as well, not that they're all
closed down.
But they want to kind of
methodically figure things out.
Sevens have almost
the opposite energy.
>>REGINA: Where's the party?
>>FRANK: Let's plan
the next thing.
And if five is saying no,
we haven't even done this.
So you can feel that tension.
The plus for each one, and
how they can help each other,
is the seven can really help the
five be a little more playful
and enjoy things before all the
study is done, you might say.
>>REGINA: But are the fives
usually resistant to that?
Or can you draw them out?
>>FRANK: It depends.
Anyone feeling safe and loved
can alter their behavior.
If you come at a five and
saying, get out of yourself.
You're in your
head all the time.
It's not a great--
>>REGINA: Not good.
It's not a good strategy.
So what would you say to that
five to have them come out
and have a little fun?
>>FRANK: Yeah.
You may have to seduce
them a bit in having fun,
to almost come to
the dance floor
and bring them-- pick
them up, grab their hand.
And once fives--
I mean, not all fives--
not that they're not fun.
There's a lot of
really fun fives.
>>REGINA: Wave the hors
d'oeuvres under their nose,
and then go pass
on to the other.
>>FRANK: Yes.
Life is not so bad.
Taste this.
It's kind of like that,
to kind of take them out.
And the five with the seven--
it's pretty hard sell
for a five to say
just quiet down a little bit,
or let's look a little deeper
at something.
Because the five gets
restless with that.
>>REGINA: And the
seven isn't necessarily
inclined in that
same way, right?
They want-- they're more--
they want to be
out in the world.
They don't want
to miss anything.
They want to taste
everything, do everything.
So that's not a really
super easy match.
>>FRANK: No.
But it can-- it's
not super easy.
But it can work-- and in the
Enneagram theory for the seven,
one area of
development for them is
to understand their
own inner five.
And this is the wonderful
thing about relationships.
If you-- if a seven
can recognize-- you
see, what happens, we
project all that on a five
to say, as a seven would, too
much thinking, too much going
on there.
Just lighten up.
But if the seven
begins to recognize
the value of going in
sometimes-- because the seven's
energy is always going out.
>>REGINA: Right.
And see, if they can feel like--
if they can calm themselves
from the understanding
that there's a party
happening over there,
and you're not going
to be included.
You're not going because
you've got to drill down
a little bit into--
maybe it's for
work or something--
that it's OK to not be part
of everything all the time.
>>FRANK: Yes.
Yes.
And there's where
sevens mature, you see?
And so the value I see
in knowing your own type
is that in getting to
know the other types,
then you start with
the types next to you.
For the seven, it's
the eight and the six
and the lines that
connect for you.
For the seven, it's
the five and the one.
For the five, it's the
seven and the eight.
So people-- the fives
tend to be maybe
a little leery around
eights, for example.
But that's part of them.
Because fives can
use their eight--
I call those things
kind of lifelines.
In other words, each type
has its great gift, but also
its narrowness.
And we all need to fill out
the missing pieces by saying,
OK, I'm stuck in my five.
What will get me out of this?
Eight.
And when a five uses eight,
they become more forthcoming.
They become more in command.
They don't wait around to figure
out they need to learn more.
No.
Just take action right now.
>>REGINA: Don't
wait to be invited.
>>FRANK: Yes.
And you can see fives
get very aggressive.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
Oh, interesting.
>>FRANK: Especially if
they know something,
which they do know a lot.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah.
Because they take a
lot of time to learn.
>>FRANK: And then the seven
for them can be uncomfortable.
But, again, it's
like, OK, what--
that's another part of me over
there that can enjoy life.
>>REGINA: Thank you.
Let's go to the
two and the eight.
I want to make sure we have time
for each of these and two more
questions.
>>FRANK: Well, it's
interesting, because you're
picking all the ones where
the lines do connect.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
All right.
>>FRANK: And you intuitively
kind of knew that.
And my theory
about it is that we
tend to have the most
significant relationships
with people with
whom we share a line.
And we battle it
out, or we learn.
The two and the
eight-- so the two
tends to be focused on
others and on making sure
that people have a
positive experience, that I
can help make you happy.
I can provide something that
will bring good feelings.
Me--
>>REGINA: Nurturing.
>>FRANK: I don't know.
Nurturing, yeah.
The eights are not nurturers.
That's just not on their radar,
not that they don't care.
But it's like they just
go, what has to be done?
Let's go do it.
And if someone gets knocked
out of the way on the way,
I'm sorry, but I'm just
asserting the power--
>>REGINA: Had to be done.
>>FRANK: Had to be done.
>>REGINA: Those would seem
almost polar opposite.
>>FRANK: Yes.
It's kind of a classic
relationship there.
Now, I always say
when I coupled--
when I worked with couples--
let's say it was a
two and an eight.
I would say, here's the line.
You both are kind of polar
opposites here in certain ways.
If you, two, would move an
inch closer to the eight,
and you, eight, would move
an inch closer to the two,
you'll have a better chance
of understanding one another.
So for the two, two do you
need to assert yourself
a little more sometimes?
Two, do you need to
recognize that you
have some power as well?
Twos tend to go to eights
when they're trapped,
when they don't know what
else to do because they're
angry that someone
didn't appreciate them,
and then they're in your face.
And people get surprised by
this very supportive, sweet two.
>>REGINA: They go into
passive-aggressive stuff.
>>FRANK: Well, no.
Aggressive.
>>REGINA: Aggressive.
Oh, all right.
There you go.
>>FRANK: In your face.
The eight-- just taking
care of business.
Don't think about it.
>>REGINA: Nothing personal.
>>FRANK: Nothing personal.
So for the eight, that one
inch of movement is to say,
hmm, I wonder how this
affects someone I care about.
Maybe I'm always blustery.
And also eights tend to
overindulge in things.
They do too much of whatever it
is literally-- food, sex, life.
It's like we got to just--
>>REGINA: They're gobbling
it up with the big spoon.
>>FRANK: Yeah.
But what does this do to others?
>>REGINA: So bottom
line, would you
say on a relative
scale percentagewise
that might have a higher
percentage of divorce, to it?
[LAUGHTER]
>>FRANK: Well, it could.
I mean, we're always--
>>REGINA: I'm asking because
if we know these things, if we
know ourselves, if our
partner knows themselves,
or our potential friend or
partner know themselves a bit,
and you use the Enneagram
as a lens, not a box,
you could avoid-- say, hey,
we could be great friends,
but it probably wouldn't be
good to be in a tight space
together every day.
>>FRANK: Well, it's possible.
I think once people
learn the Enneagram,
at first they might go, oh, man.
Really?
I'm this and you're that?
And I can look--
any type can get
along with another.
Some are more challenging.
But, again, it comes
back to how willing
you are to soften the
edges of your type.
>>REGINA: OK.
Just two more questions because
we're almost out of time.
So I want to go back to that
expansion and contraction
issue within us, as
whatever our type is.
And then I'm going to ask you
another question on the heels
of it, which is, do we change
types as we mature and go
through phases of our life?
>>FRANK:
Expansion-contraction is
the language I use around this.
Other people talk about
levels of development.
But my way to say it
is, what type you are,
or what type you live in,
is not as important as where
you live in your type.
In other words, we could live
in our more narrow, where
I'm fixated on my beliefs.
If it's an eight, I
have to stay in control.
I have to be in the power
of position no matter what.
That's a narrow side.
And it's all held in by these
mental, emotional patterns
that are unconscious.
>>REGINA: So like you
said a minute ago,
if you have a two
and an eight, if they
move toward each other,
that's expansion.
>>FRANK: Yes.
And it gives you your particular
path from your point of view.
We don't-- you can say, well,
we all on a path of growth.
Yes, we are.
But here's your specific--
your GPS points you this way.
And so for the
eight what we do--
the expansion starts this way.
Eight, what would
your nine be like?
Eight begins to mellow a
little bit with a nine.
Eight and the nine taking
him-- it's right next to you.
How about if you just see the--
>>REGINA: And the
nine is a peacemaker.
>>FRANK: How do I see that
there's many points of view,
not just mine.
It isn't my way or the highway.
The nine says, there are
a lot of highways, OK?
The seven says,
lighten up a bit.
Enjoy yourself, but come on.
And then the line that
connects the eight to the two
that says, think about others.
And the eight that connects
to the five, the other line,
it says sometimes go in a
little bit and analyze before.
Because eights tend
to act and then think.
They're very impulsive.
The five really thinks
through something
before they take an action.
So there's the expansion.
So again-- and once you
do that, already you've
got four other types
that are like you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
No, it makes sense.
It's just maturing and
expanding into potentials--
that are your potentials.
So what about the notion of
changing throughout a lifetime?
>>FRANK: I would
call it prevailing
theory is that we don't
necessarily change our type,
but we grow on our type.
>>REGINA: Maybe
what we do is expand
into all these other
relative types within it.
>>FRANK: We'll learn that
it's not that I am an eight.
I see life through
this lens only.
What else can I do?
And another really
key thing in the types
is called subtypes, which
we don't talk about here.
But we do sometimes move
through those in our life,
depending on circumstances.
So you might be
operating as a four
in your one-on-one
subtype, which
is going to look different
from your social subtype,
and different stages of
life will require that.
>>REGINA: Well, like if you're
going through a long period
of grief, for example,
that might switch--
that might shift
your subtype too.
>>FRANK: I've seen people
identify themselves as fours
when they are in grief.
So there's an overlay of that.
But generally, we don't
really, that I can see,
change our type.
We get more like our type.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>FRANK: And also, we
get less like our type--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>FRANK: --where we're
not as identified with it.
It's like we're more than that.
And that's what Enneagram
invites us to do.
>>REGINA: It's so beautiful.
And you're so-- I love
the fact that you just
love the Enneagram.
You're so good at it.
You're so passionate about it.
And your passion
comes through and gets
everybody excited to jump
on it and try to find out
what's going on.
>>FRANK: I hope so.
This is the best thing
that's come along.
>>REGINA: I love it.
I love it.
Well, Frank, thanks
again for taking the time
and congratulations
on your new book.
>>FRANK: Thanks
for having me back.
I really appreciate it.
>>REGINA: Again, the
title of the book
is "A Field Guide to
Humans," by Frank De Luca.
If you enjoyed this
conversation, by the way,
you might also enjoy my
previous conversation with Frank
here in the Gaia archives.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]